at the 1984 Democratic National
Convention Bobby Campbell a prominent
AIDS activist argued for a presidential
candidate who would actually address the
AIDS crisis unlike the Reagan
Administration whose mandate regarding
the growing pandemic was to look pretty
and do as little as possible in
Campbell's speech he discussed the need
for diverse representation of queer
people in Media I have a message for the
nation
very often lesbians and gay men are
portrayed as isolated alienated and
alone or else in a pathetic search for
desperate sexuality
I don't think that that's true and I
think that it's important for people to
understand that lesbians and gay men do
not exist outside of a context we exist
in the context of the people we love and
those that love us Campbell's demand for
more stories that truly represent the
queer experience as human experience has
oddly
taken hold most strongly within the
horror genre in one way or another
despite their focus on pain and
suffering horror films explore a wide
range of human fears often these fears
are projections of mass societal
anxieties that touch upon politics
psychology sociology and relationships
between vastly different life
experiences the horror genre
consistently mirrors the concerns and
fears of society as a whole
Invasion of the Body Snatchers depicts
the apprehension of the 1950s regarding
an alien or foreign Invasion the hunger
and Fright Night portray the
infectiousness of queer culture in the
1980s and the final moments of Night of
the Living Dead shed light on the racism
of the 1960s and Cloverfield depicted
the apprehension of a societal
Apocalypse in the wake of September the
11th horror utilizes the Fantastic to
develop the internal fears of these and
countless other periods thereby
extrapolating their shared realities
I've tried to look at how horror affects
us over the last couple of years first
with a look at the history of queer
representation and Horror in my video
monsters in the closet then as society's
Fear of Everything queer and different
in deep cuts
and then last year I looked at how we
queer people will let monsters into our
lives because we think we deserve
nothing better
this has become a sort of tradition for
me every October
a tradition I have all too much fun
digging my teeth into
and this year is no different
but instead of looking at how horror is
queer-coded
let's actually take a look at horror
from a truly queer perspective
queer creators queer characters queer
monsters and something that Hollywood so
very rarely deigns to give us
queer Heroes
[Music]
thank you
I spoke about The Silence of the Lambs
all the way back in monsters in the
closet and touched again on it briefly
and fear-coded so I feel it is best to
start with something that happened right
after the release of the film The
revelation of a truly horrific queer
monster that was all too real
Jeffrey Dahmer
Dahmer was a gay serial killer with a
penchant for pedophilia he frequently
abducted young men and boys from gay
bars raped and murdered them and then
used their bodies in gruesome medical
experiments he'd admit that he was
trying to make sex zombies out of the
bodies he dismembered and experimented
on so that they'd fulfill his sexual
needs and never leave his side Dahmer
said he drugged and raped the men then
drilled holes into their brains and
injected chemicals to turn them into
mute zombie sex slaves after his victims
passed on he would do anything from
keeping their body parts as souvenirs to
engaging in necrophilia
to even eating them unfortunately the
police largely rejected the evidence of
gay survivors and their families after
Dahmer murdered 17 men and boys most of
whom were young men of color in May of
1991 police found one victim a 14 year
old walking the streets naked and still
confused from Dahmer's drugging
he had fled from Dahmer's apartment
Dahmer told the authorities that the
young man was his boyfriend and asked
that he'd be returned to his care
the cops complied
and Dahmer killed the boy shortly
thereafter in 1991 when Jeffrey Dahmer
was in the news and Buffalo Bill was in
theaters the public received a barrage
of messaging claiming that homosexual
serial killers were widespread in the
United States and often connected to
pedophilia the notoriety of serial
killers like Jeffrey Dahmer and John
Wayne Gacy before him along with the
media's unrelenting focus on them
contributed to the stereotype that all
gay men were perverts while heterosexual
serial killers Like Richard Ramirez and
Ted Bundy were rarely categorized as
such and their sexual orientation was
rarely the focus of public attention
unless it was women throwing themselves
at Ted Bundy one source of violence
against LGBT individuals is The
Stereotype that they're more likely to
engage in violent Behavior due to their
malicious sexuality
in addition the Casual homophobia of
1980s films and toxic masculinity
portrayed therein contributed to the
violence against queer people in the
1990s and afterwards Nightbreed directed
by Clive Barker explores the formation
of a queer family as a means of safety
from the violence of the outside world
Clive Barker a pioneering openly gay
author and filmmaker encodes almost all
of his works with queer themes after
being duped by his psychiatrist into
thinking that he's a serial killer our
protagonist seeks Solace among the
Nightbreed a group of outcast creatures
who dwell in a deserted Cemetery for
protection from the rest of society
can anyone watch Nightbreed and not
automatically associate the titular
characters with queer people asks Trace
Thurman co-host of the horror queers
podcast they've been Outcast by society
and are deemed as dangerous by the
normal people the climax of the film
culminates in an assault on the
nightbreed's home base of Midian as the
normies would rather kill all of them as
opposed to understand them
sound familiar queer undertones are a
vital part of Nightbreed rather than
risk the anger of respectable citizens
the film's monsters retreated into their
own Enclave
the normies want to hurt and kill
everyone who is different from them
the monsters who were othered because of
their looks came together to establish
Midian and their own
other queer family
the creatures of night breeds Midian
were very much present in the 1990s
American reality we monsters knew we had
to stick together to avoid being victims
of regular people's aggression and to
look out for each other in case one of
them was attacked not surprisingly
anti-queer and transphobic violence
continued to be a problem throughout the
1990s with two of the most high profile
killings of the time that of Brandon
Tina in 1993 and that of Matthew Shepard
in 1998
acting as sort of horrific bookends that
saw the American government first
Embrace queer people well at least gay
people and then throw us under the bus
for political expediency but in the
fictions of the big screen queer writers
and directors have had much more of a
say in what happens than in real life
since the 1930s such creators have been
at the Forefront of the horror genre but
that doesn't mean they always have the
LGBT community's best interests at heart
Kevin Williamson who penned the faculty
and scream came out as gay to his family
and friends in 1992. unfortunately the
character of stokely's betrayal and the
faculty perpetuates the Trope of the
butch lesbian who after meeting the
right boy
suddenly becomes comfortable with her
own femininity
but is that Williamson's fault queer
filmmakers especially queer
screenwriters will have their work
relentlessly scrutinized by Executives
for markers of queer sexuality as
queerness has been suppressed or
portrayed as evil for decades a lot of
pressure gets put on gay artists to fix
the queer image
when it really should be shared more
evenly with their straight and cisgender
contemporaries however queer authors and
filmmakers of the genre have an
opportunity to give audiences a peek
into and through the queer lens and to
create characters that are not Odes to
the repeated stereotypes that have
plagued gay characters for most of
Cinema history
but we queers had some reason to hope
that perhaps
we wouldn't be straight washed out of
horror Cinema anymore with the character
of David from the Bride of Chucky an out
gay character who isn't tragic or the
butt of a joke
he's killed on screen of course but not
by our Plucky team of Serial killing
dolls Chucky and Tiffany instead he
accidentally steps in front of a semi
and gets liquefied on the highway he's
not killed because he's gay but because
he wasn't watching where he was going
and so the 1990s ended on a hopeful note
for queer visibility in the horror genre
sadly the queer Persona is created for
the horror spoofs that swamped the box
office in the 2000s would derail this
ambition due to the widespread coverage
of falling and broken bodies from the
World Trade Center attacks in 2001 as
well as Internet footage depicting
suspected terrorists being subjected to
gruesome torture techniques like
waterboarding and bodily stress
positions by American CIA agents
Americans had become desensitized to
your typical slasher films and so a
sub-genre focusing on body horror
emerged alongside the rise of the horror
comedy
there would be just as much anger at the
start of the new decade due to
inaccurate portrayals of the queer
Community as there had been
at the end of the last one
unfortunately outdated homophobic
stereotypes jokes and slurs persisted in
the media depictions of queer people
especially in the horror genre Kelly
Rowland a real-life member of Destiny's
Child plays the character of Kia in the
slasher Blockbuster Freddy vs Jason
which had the guts to include a
homophobic slur intended at horror
Legend Freddy Krueger the question is
posed
what kind of runs around in a Christmas
sweater
I don't know what else could serve as a
better time capsule for the early 2000s
than this line Chris egerton editor of
billboard magazine said Kia uses it as a
term of
denigration and emasculation it is
lobbed in an effort to diminish his
power just as it has been against LGBT
individuals throughout history you're
not even scary she follows up Freddy
goes on to semi-refute this by having
Jason brutally murder her
if only he could have murdered that line
too Freddy versus Jason wasn't the only
example of casual homophobia finding its
way into the horror genre though
Millennium horror tends to Echo the
Casual homophobia of the 1980s
films like American Psycho which is set
in the 1980s Wall Street World revealed
the homophobia rooted in fear of the
other that was at the root of the
Decades usage of queer people as punch
lines Patrick Bateman the film's
antagonist is a wealthy murderer who
takes great pride in the look of his
business suits and the layout of his
business card
Peter Staley a closeted gay man in the
1980s who worked in a similar stocks and
bonds environment as character Patrick
Bateman and whose story is told in the
documentary how to survive a plague
often heard the locker room spill into
the boardroom several times a week some
hideous and costly outcome gave cause
for a traitor to slam his telephone
against his cubicle or a salesman's
chair or one of the room's many pillars
with such force that plastic shards shot
across several tiers
almost without variation the targets of
Rage were eggs pansies sissies fairies
and suckers Bateman uses homophobic
slurs to blend in with his buddies and
is repulsed when his co-worker Lewis
tries to seduce him in the men's
restroom
prompting Bateman to vigorously wash his
gloved hands this type of toxic
masculinity was ingrained in the wealth
culture of the 1980s and dominated boys
locker room language well into the New
Millennium it would even be the excuse
for Eli Roth's homophobic dialogue in
his breakout 2006 film hostile written
and directed by Roth hostile follows
Josh Paxton and Ollie three male friends
who travel through Europe in search of
girls drugs and good times would find
themselves at the hands of psychotic
Killers who pay an expert hunting team
to torture victims the movie is full of
violence profanity and bro talk with
several of the characters using gay
slurs as forms of insult and comedy in
addition while riding the train Josh
gets touched on the leg by a stranger
who then says what is your nature after
Josh has yelled at the man the latter is
ejected from their train car when Josh
runs into this same man again this time
behind a bar he tries to make amends
his Pals tease him by calling him
because of course they do this
individual who tells Josh he is gay
eventually turns out to be the one
responsible for Josh's murder
poetry in motion
eniochialo wrote about the homophobia of
hostile in fengoria magazine in 2006 the
lesson learned
no matter how nice they seem never be
nice to a homosexual because in the end
they'll get you the characters
continuously refer to each other as
Edgar you're gay and everyone laughs and
everything is Jolly
but not for a lot of queer rights
supporters I understand that this is
just a horror film and that it probably
won't impact much of society but as long
as a movie like this continues to Target
an audience of teens to late 20s
heterosexual males issues of anti-gay
Prejudice will never be satisfied Roth
initially met this criticism with a
reaction akin to boys will be boys
the following year a musician turned
director Rob Zombie and noted Ally
released his remake of John Carpenter's
Halloween
as with Roth's hostile homophobia rears
its ugly head with slurs littered
throughout the film
however while Roth's use of homophobia
is more gratuitous chalked up to Young
people's vernacular
zombies frequent uses of homophobic
slurs particularly the epsler are said
by characters the audience is not
supposed to empathize with
but rather revile
unlike Roth's protagonists hostile part
2 is an example of how a filmmaker can
actually take criticism and grow this
film is still Tethered to the torture
porn trend of post-9 11 horror so no
character is safe from mutilation but
the film does feature a queer lead
character who is level-headed and not
fetishized she dies of course because
well hostile but you know baby steps and
those baby steps were needed film
historian Vito Russo said gave his
ability has never really been an issue
in the movies it's how they have been
visible that has remained offensive for
almost a century
so no more films about homosexuality
instead more films that explore people
who happen to be gay in America and how
their lives intersect with the dominant
culture he said this in the 80s as the
New Millennium lumbered on fresh gay
narratives were much appreciated if rare
it was time for a new narrative one that
didn't dwell on the difficulties of
being queer in America but instead
focused on everyday Americans who
just happened to be queer in 2002's May
a young woman is bullied as a child due
to her lazy eye
May is strange and withdrawn and has
difficulty connecting with others she
develops feelings for Adam a local
mechanic and is also fascinated by
Paulie an outgoing co-worker at the
animal hospital where she works Polly is
hopelessly in love with May and makes
repeated attempts to seduce her
she encourages me to come out of her
comfort zone but she doesn't know about
May's
unorthodox friend
a doll May speaks with when nobody's
around
the audience sympathizes with this odd
girl who just wants some attention
despite the fact that she turns into a
horrible killer later in the film
spurred on by Adam dumping her and
calling her strange May runs away from
Adam's attempts to avoid her and into
the arms of Paulie who says to kiss you
since I first saw you
May is skeptical at first but she soon
discovers that she actually likes Polly
Polly noticing May's reticence says do
you feel weird diamonds I am weird
despite the fact that Paulie and her
other lover Ambrosia are eventually
killed by May in her quest to construct
a doll out of human parts in the style
of a modern-day Frankenstein's monster
neither paulies nor May's sexualities
are to blame
simply put their lesbians in a horror
film doomed to the same fate as
countless other female protagonists in
the genre
nothing special about being queer in a
horror movie
early 2000s gave birth to the
Blockbuster horror parody via the Wayans
brothers scary movie franchise many
problematic and highly stereotypical gay
male personas were invented by the
comedy duo before the scary movie films
Damon Wayans and David Alan Grier played
campy flamboyant gay Cinema critics
Blaine Edwards and Antoine Meriweather
on the enormously successful TV show In
Living Color conceived and produced by
Keenan Ivory Wayans critics and fans of
the show have argued about whether or
not the presence of Edwards and
Meriwether is objectionable and whether
or not it's a rare opportunity for
mainstream audiences to experience gay
black male sexuality on film in 1990
okay black filmmaker Marlon Riggs said I
feel very ambivalent
it plays into the stereotypes the
dominant culture has of us
but that's not my concern
not that they're Queens they're Camp
Queens
but rather it's an image of Queens who
function in a way that justifies all the
very traditional beliefs about black gay
sexuality it plays into an ocean of
black asexuality held by the black gay
community a notion that black gay men
are sissies ineffectual ineffective
woman-ish in a way that signifies
inferiority rather than empowerment
Luann's Brother's first film scary movie
perhaps learned from the past mistakes
while sadly still retaining key
personality features when creating the
character of Rey a masculine football
player with a girlfriend who is not so
secretly gay his homosexual Antics in
both the first and second film of the
series recall both Hollywood's
perpetuation of homophobic stereotypes
and the gay antics of the characters of
In Living Color Rey's homosexuality is
strongly implied by the fact that he is
constantly making lewd advances toward
his male peers listening to its reigning
Men by The Pointer Sisters in the car
and eagerly sprinting to the locker room
showers to smack his male teammates on
the behind with a wet towel Rey even
makes the culturally significant gesture
of tucking his penis between his legs in
front of his companions a move made
famous by Buffalo Bill in Silence of the
Lambs scary movie also has the
pretty damn transphobic character of Ms
man a girl's gym coach played by female
bodybuilder Jane tricka man makes a
number of lewd comments to the girls and
even seen sniffing their underwear in
the office at one point scary movie Man
reveals to Cindy that the only reason
she underwent gender confirmation
surgery from male to female was so that
she might have an advantage over her
competitors in athletics and we wonder
why the more ignorant Among Us are so
worried about trans people playing
sports any attempt at humor in man's
predatory behavior is rendered even more
toxic by the presence of an SS uniform
hanging behind her desk the idea of the
predatory queer Nazi persists as
evidenced by Ms man's SS costume even
Buffalo Bill displays Nazi memorabilia
in his home in the last 15 minutes of
the film there is a brief shot of a bed
spread with a swastika design Ms man was
made for comedy despite the gravity
associated with her casual Nazi SS
costume in this horror comedy parody the
queerness is both meant to be funny yet
predatory with the killers of the first
film both being gay Camp satire slasher
psycho beach party adapted from the 1987
play by drag Superstar Charles bush is
on the Other Extreme of the horror
parody Spectrum as an Ode to and
critique of the camp of the 1960s Bush's
psycho beach party 30 mocks can't be B
movies while also highlighting the
queerness of the genre and confounding
queer preconceptions Florence Chiclet
Forest our protagonist is a girl who
aspires to be normal just like the boys
so she can surf with them within the
first 10 minutes of the film The
unassuming bully Rhonda makes comments
on Chiclets gender identity because she
is not as hyper feminine as the other
girls of the 1960s Rhonda says she heard
Chiclet went off to Denmark for the
summer I heard you going there to have
some sort of an operation Operation yeah
I heard you're having your dick cut off
and turning into a girl a clear
reference to Christine Jorgensen who
underwent gender confirmation surgery in
Denmark in 1952 becoming world famous in
the process psycho beach party also
makes an obvious reference to Alfred
Hitchcock's Psycho through Chiclets
ominous split personality that alludes
to her being the murderer plaguing the
teens on the beach as for the men most
of the beach sequences have them
flaunting their chiseled physiques and
strutting around like confident Surfers
but when yo-yo and provlone to Surf
buddies engage in a half-naked wrestling
match on the sand twice it becomes
evident that they aren't being entirely
honest Bush makes sure their unrequited
love is pointed out all throughout the
movie culminating in a big kiss
even Chiclets nerdy independent best
friend berdine who would rather analyze
the subtext of horror films than date
boys tries to make a pass on her best
friend and soul mate but like so many
queer couplings in film they don't quite
make it to the finish line
the United States of America in the
2010s was teeming with newly discovered
representation in both pop culture and
mainstream life homophobic and
transphobic Americans often respond
negatively to this newfound visibility
and celebration of queer history and
culture although marriage equality
passed through the Supreme Court in 2013
the election of Donald Trump in 2016
portended difficult days ahead for the
queer community in the U.S for queer
Americans Trump's selection of openly
anti-gay Mike Pence as vice president
was a clear signal that his government
would be far less welcoming than the
previous one despite Trump's own
half-hearted attempts to appeal to queer
voters all of this led to a terrorist
attack on the queer community
which would become the bloodiest mass
shooting in U.S history up to that time
a shooter opened fire at the Pulse
Nightclub in Orlando Florida on June 12
2016. there were 50 fatalities the vast
majority of them LGBT Latino men
after the events of September 11 2001
this was the worst terrorist assault in
the United States and the deadliest mass
shooting in American history since the
Pulse Nightclub was so well known for
its queer clientele it was immediately
recognized as the target of a homophobic
attack when news of the shooting spread
another blow was dealt to the queer
community on July 26 2017 when President
Trump declared his intention to Bar
transgender people from serving in the
U.S military
in a series of tweets
and yet despite the devastating and
frustrating defeats queer Americans
endured throughout the Trump
Administration film would prove more
accessible than ever to the experiences
of queer people
even more so than in other genres horror
films regularly feature dozens of queer
characters often depicted with Grace and
respect for the queer experience horror
at its best has always been political
from Invasion of the Body Snatchers
extrapolating the fear of the Cold War
into stories of violent alien encounters
tonight of the Living Dead having the
black hero of a zombie apocalypse slain
by white police officers
this sub-genre of fiction takes a
fantastic and horrific look at the state
of American politics it's possible that
the generally positive gay portrayals
and horror films of the 2010s
could help to counter The increased
hostility and backlash that had been
directed at members of the community
after the election of Donald Trump and
the emergence of white supremacist
Neo-Nazi movements all across the
country
sometimes horror movies even act as a
Force for good as part of their
marketing campaigns for new films one of
the bloodiest film franchises in history
saw had organized wildly successful
blood donation campaigns since the
franchise's Inception in 2004 the blood
drive has been an integral part of the
saw franchise serving both to promote
the famed torture porn blood Fest that
are the saw films and to thank donors
with complementary seats to the premiere
in 2017 the campaign took a more
political turn
drawing attention to the discriminatory
of blood donation policies that Target
gay men the FDA instituted a lifetime
prohibition on any potential male donor
who had had sex with a man at the outset
of the AIDS crisis even though blood
donation programs are mandated to check
all participants blood
this implies that gay blood is
inherently unhealthy and undesirable
social media personalities with huge
queer fan bases were featured in the
blood drives campaign in 2017. as of now
the saw blood drives have collected over
000 pints of blood despite the fact that
few are safe from the clutches of evil
and horror movies the genre has in
recent years
provided a welcoming environment in
which gay characters can be explored and
regarded seriously like in happy death
day and happy death day to you
where a recurring queer character named
Tim is given multiple opportunities to
come out
at first glance he comes across as a
typical sexist dude bro but is revealed
by the protagonist to be in fact gay
Tim's screen time is relatively short in
both movies but the director's decision
to incorporate and emphasize what may
seem like a side narrative to the main
plot will always stick with gay viewers
the film's director the openly gay
Christopher Landon was bullied as a
child for being gay and an outcast as a
child Landon sought comfort in horrific
stories which sparked his interests and
Ambitions in the horror genre by
including Tim's narrative in his films
the director sends a message of
acceptance to the many other queer Youth
and adults
all across the world
Don Mancini via his iconic Child's Play
franchise is well known for queering
horror a bit more with each installment
especially with 2004's Seed of Chucky
Glenn slash Glenda they them pronouns
child of Chucky and his doll bride
Tiffany was separated at Birth from
their parents in the final scene of
Bride of Chucky Mancini's use of the
names Glenn and Glenda for the character
calling back to the Edward classic Glenn
or Glenda six years after being born in
a New Jersey cemetery and being taken to
the UK by a cruel Puppet Master the
child now known as [ __ ] decides to
go in search of their parents in
Hollywood after seeing commercials for a
film featuring two dolls with the same
made in Japan markings on their wrists
Glenn slash Glenda is mistaken for a boy
at first because of their haircut and
the way their Puppeteer refers to them
but when Chucky and Tiffany finally get
to meet their offspring they get into an
argument over whether or not they should
be called Glenn or Glenda she just had
an accident
you mean
he had an accident even though Chucky
has chosen the name Glenn for his future
child Tiffany insists that they be
called Glenda and I'm gonna call you
Glenn
the name is that for a girl your name is
Glenda they pull down Glenn slash
blender's pants to show that they like
all other dolls have nothing going on
down there this genitalia scene points
out the absurdity of choosing a child's
gender and how parents expectations and
desires get in the way of what a child
actually wants in a rather Progressive
scene Tiffany and Chucky have a dialogue
with Glenn slash Glenda about who they
want to be I want a girl I want a boy
what about what I want well which is it
sometimes I feel like a boy
sometimes I feel like a girl no matter
what happens we'll deal with it together
as a family as a result of their
conversation Tiffany now supports her
child's non-binary gender expression
Noreen giffney and Myra J heard in
queering the non-human discuss just how
imperative this scene is in This
brilliant intersexual thematic gender
legibility is shown to be important for
the parents not the child
and the film foregrounds the ways in
which normative identity requires stable
gender in refusing to be either Glenn or
Glenda and insisting on being both
Chucky and Tiffany's kid focuses our
attention on the horrific effects of
heteronormativity and turns attention
away from the monstrosity of The
Ambiguously gendered body the queer
future of horror depicted in Glenn
Glenda is one that places a greater
emphasis on the problematic social
constructions of gender and the fact
that queer people and Dolls exist not to
be a spectacle but to have truthful
narratives told about them the
monstrosity is in the way their parents
quarrel about their gender not in the
way Glenn slash Glenda looks or acts
Mancini utilizes Glenn slash Glenda to
show that a non-binary person is valid
and should be able to study their gender
identity and sexuality without the
influence of others rather than showing
the character as a horrific device
bodies belong to those who habit them
transgender and non-binary people exist
across the queer sexuality and gender
spectrum and as such they should not be
forced into tiny acceptable boxes under
Mancini's Authority Seed of Chucky is
gloriously queer and refuses to paint
trans and non-binary bodies as violent
and grotesque despite their physical
scary doll appearance Mancini continued
his queer inclusion with the following
Chucky films The Curse of Chucky in 2013
and Cult of Chucky in 2017 but most of
all in the new TV series simply titled
Chucky
in which we find ourselves watching the
development of a sweet gay teen romance
in the middle of a horror show when 14
year old Jake wheeler gets his hands on
the titular possessed doll things get
interesting for the budding artist who
has a crush on classmate Devin Chucky
played once again by Brad Dourif and not
the knockoff Mark Hamill version I love
Mark Hamill
but no Chucky may still enjoy
ingeniously killing off his victims by
means of electrocution or throwing them
out of Windows or stabbing them but he
also has a lot of heart and it's not
just a heart that he stole from somebody
else's body the show is fundamentally a
coming-of-age story despite being
marketed as a coming-of-rage story and
Jake's developing queerness is presented
as both instrumental and incidental to
the plot his first love just happens to
be a boy while Chucky arguably
represents his inner turmoil when Jake's
drunken and violent father teases him
about his interests in dolls and his
tendency to spend time alone Jake or
tortz hi you don't care that they think
I'm weird
you just care that they know my
and then Chucky kills him
a lovely little inversion of the kill
your gaze Trope kill your homophobes
Chucky might say in episode 2 Chucky
points out that he has a queer kid a
call back to Glenn slash Glenda you know
I have a queer kid you have a kid gender
fluid you're you're cool with it
I'm not a monster Jake and as we've come
to expect from the child's play
franchise since 1998's Bride of Chucky
introduced Jennifer Tilly to the series
the show is deliciously camp with Tilly
returning to chew the scenery and Fiona
Dora vying for her MVP Crown as a young
version of her father Brad's character
Charles Lee Ray the serial killer who's
transferred via blood magic into Chucky
Mancini has stated that he's infused his
work with a queer sensibility whether
through the use of black humor the
inclusion of queer supporting characters
or the portrayal of Glenn slash glinda's
struggle to determine their gender
identity in Seed of Chucky Tilly
recalled how producers deemed Seed of
Chucky which features John Waters a
Britney Spears look-alike and Hannah
from S Club 7 getting killed off by the
doll to be too gay though they maybe
should have realized that when they had
a movie about a non-binary doll starring
Jennifer Tilly but in a genre with
queera tours such as screams Kevin
Williamson who says the Scream movies
are coded gay survival Hellraisers Clive
Barker and final destinations Jeffrey
Reddick queer references traditionally
had to be subtext that's one of the joys
of Chucky that it gives outright
representation to slasher film fans who
previously had to find it piecemeal
where they could usually in villains who
could not identify with Jason a kid
bullied for being different and then
gets to come back and have his revenge
on the preppy jocks who made his
childhood a living hell but now
Chucky's Jake gets to do what very very
few have done before not only be a rare
final boy but one who makes it to the
end and gets the guy even though horror
has become much more diverse in recent
years there's still something queerly
revelatory about anchoring a 33 year old
stab-happy franchise a better killer
doll to an adolescent gay love story
further cementing Chucky's Legacy as a
queer icon who quite literally slays
queer people have developed an unusual
system of identification you see we
queers have always been reduced to
villains or worthless Side characters
with little to no backbone because of
this terrible dearth of positive
representation
gay people have had to make a choice
identify with the side character or the
main villain and so we connect with
these perceived evil characters because
of their overt or covert queerness such
as Dr pretorius from the Bride of
Frankenstein or Countess Maria's Alaska
from Dracula's daughter we have become
accustomed to identifying with the
villain due to the fact that film has
historically repressed us and designated
us as scapegoats for villainy as a
result marginalized people desperate for
representation continue to adopt these
horror monsters as their own to
celebrate as anti-heroes final girls are
also being embraced by queer people who
want to be symbolized by powerful
empathetic androgynous Victors of
Oppression traits that are undoubtedly
familiar to many throughout the queer
Spectrum in horror the final girl is
typically portrayed as a heterosexual
cisgender white woman because straight
white faces have dominated horror films
from the earliest days of the silent
horror era the final girl's look has
been cliched and expected fans of horror
who are black Asian gay trans Hispanic
non-binary or any other race gender or
sexual orientation other than the stock
model for the sole survivor and horror
films must find themselves within the
characterizations of the final girl in
films with little to no minority
representation despite her outward
appearance looking for representation
beyond the physical may be satisfying
for individuals particularly gay people
when one looks beyond the white female
face of the final girl one might find
amazing personality qualities and
attributes that mirror the gay
experience the final girl may appear to
be a gorgeous face on the surface but on
the inside she is brimming with the
fortitude strength and persistence
required to fight monstrous slashers and
high school bullies qualities that many
queer people have gained in order to
thrive in a queerphobic world Carol J
Clover a cinema and gender historian and
Final girl specialist deconstructs what
a final girl means in the horror Canon
her Book Men Women in chainsaws provides
a hypothesis for what the Final Girl
implies in a horror film as well as the
characteristics that make her a feminist
hero the final girl is usually the only
character who is mentally developed with
wits and Brawn in times of peril and
finally beats the villain towards the
conclusion of the film audiences relate
with her since she is usually the lone
rational character even if she makes
mistakes along the way such as going up
the stairs instead of sprinting out the
front door the final girl's humanity is
acknowledged
she is the one who brings down the
oppressor
and the crowd cheers her on Clover
explains that she is by any measure the
slasher film's hero the final girl has
not just manned herself she specifically
unmans the oppressor the Final Girl
holds the traits required not just to
preserve herself for No One generally
comes to her Aid but also to avenge all
those slaughtered and tormented by the
oppressor her bravery though is not
gendered despite the name given to the
horror film survivors the final girl is
neither conventionally or
stereotypically feminine she is a hybrid
of masculine and female characteristics
as Clover states she alternates between
registers of masculine and feminine from
the outset before her final struggle she
endures the deepest throws of femininity
and even during that final struggle she
is now weak and now strong
now flee's the Killer and now charges
him now stabs and is stabbed now Cries
Out In Fear And now shouts in anger
she is a physical female and character
illogical Androgen the concept of the
final girl actually being non-binaries
kind of groundbreaking in terms of
gender queer identity films like Brian
De Palma's carry allow for
identification by mistreated Outsiders
who desire just to fit in but reach a
Breaking Point from which there's no
return
Clover's theoretical final girl
perspective allows us to see clear-cut
final girls like Nancy Thompson in a
Nightmare on Elm Street in a new light
Nancy Thompson is a young high school
student struggling with the strange
death of her closest friend and
persistent dreams of a burnt man in a
red and green sweater Freddy Krueger the
infamous child killer although she looks
to be the adorable girl next door
Nancy's Talent stem from her bravery and
confronting Krueger in her nightmares
and her ability to bring him into the
real world when no one else would or
could
she outwits the adversary while also
fighting her oppressor physically
Heather langenkamp who plays Nancy in
the film spoke with gay times about the
significance of her role among gay
horror fans she was surprised to see
that many young gay men relate with
Nancy who they see as a crucial
character in the film series as a whole
more than langenkamp had anticipated
further more lesbian women can recognize
themselves in the All-American Girl Next
Door in the framework of Nancy's story
in the first Nightmare on Elm Street
film Nancy although having a boyfriend
rarely thinks of him romantically
they're more than Pals pledging to
protect each other from the evil Freddy
Krueger but when Glenn tries to initiate
sex with a preoccupied Nancy at her best
friend Tina's Place early in the film
Nancy's comforting Tina while she's home
alone and plagued with fears of the man
in her nightmares Nancy stops him saying
not now
ourselves
Nancy is a character on a mission
to defend her friends while also killing
Freddy Krueger she has no time for
adolescent activities which is a
characteristic shared by practically all
final girls that's why they make it out
alive movies like A Nightmare on Elm
Street and Halloween which along with
the Texas Chainsaw Massacre kind of
birthed the Final Girl archetype are not
meant to be queer nevertheless the
character of the final girl in each as
well as across the spectrum of Horror
can be used as a vessel for queer
experience oppression and Hope the Final
Girl depicts a monstrous gender
a gender that splatters rips at the
seams and then is stitched back together
as something messier than male or female
though Clover theorizes that the final
girl's Essence is non-binary her body
becomes a place where queer people of
All Sorts can project their experience
and find solace in seeing themselves
Triumph on screen and their tormentors
whatever or whomever the Tormentor
represents to them
perish
by their own queer hand
Joshua Anderson in his essay the Final
Girl an lgbtq representation states that
the journey through that confusion of
coming to terms with your sexuality is
in essence the journey that these final
girls take when they are chased and
battered almost to the brink of death
for those of us who grew up in a world
where what we were learning about
ourselves was considered immorally or
internally wrong queer people in their
bodies have been utilized by and for
horror for over a century the bodies of
queer horror characters bruised and
bleeding had largely witnessed abuse and
Scorn their lives utilized for Wicked
actions or malicious laughter the
growing identification of queer people
with the Final Girl represents a
psychological need to repair the damage
that horror has inflicted on queer
bodies and Minds in the past as well as
a need to reclaim a genre that has
explicit queer Roots but lost sight of
such roots
somewhere in the 20th century this drive
for reclamation
is a reaction to the bullying of queer
people in horror films and Society in
general
horrific fiction has traditionally found
a fertile ground in the fear of
femininity it's the driving force behind
The Exorcist in which a male demon takes
over a girl's body and transforms her
into a muttering twisted and
self-mutilating Monster
Rosemary and Rosemary's Baby is pregnant
but not with a human child she wants
instead she is a host for the son of the
devil when she realizes this she takes
drastic action by changing her hairstyle
from a demure Bob to a harsh boyish
pixie
which her complicit husband publicly
condemns movies like this transform
natural processes like puberty and
pregnancy into Tales of demonic Invasion
by imbuing them with satanic potency
they use the same method that was used
to make the monsters in Silence of the
Lambs and psycho
only backward the trans feminine is a
common theme in many horror films with
characters like Buffalo Bill preying on
young girls for their skin and Norman
Bates killing as his mother to prevent
trans feminine persons from using
women's restrooms and shelters turfs and
far-right fear mongers invoke the image
of the wild
predatory transphalus fear of the
transmasculine a group far more
dismissed by Society has been rarely
voiced in mainstream Publications before
recently nevertheless transmasculinity
is still a breach of gender norms and
since it most frequently affects people
who have uteruses and so have the
capacity to produce children
it elicits a special kind of fear that
is cloaked in
condescending compassion a particularly
contentious report from Jessie's single
attempts to argue that it has become too
easy for young trans people to begin
gender confirmation procedures that some
young people may be misdiagnosing severe
gender dysphoria as something less
serious
such as sadness anxiety or patriarchal
oppression meanwhile I've spoken to
trans people who took so long to start
their transition because Society had
convinced them that their dysphoria was
all just internalized misogyny at the
same side I have read testimonies from a
number of trans people who figured out
that they were trans because of gender
Euphoria not dysphoria as though the
subjective experience of gender were a
nefarious opaque mystery he asks where
is the line between not feeling like a
girl because society makes it difficult
to be a girl and needing hormones to
alleviate dysphoria that otherwise won't
go away in a particularly revealing
thought
single rights that kids who go on
puberty blockers and then on cross-sex
hormones may not be able to have
biological children as though the life
of a theoretical future child matters
more than the life of a potentially
trans but certainly already living child
2018's hereditary plays upon the fears
single stirs up the film's villain
Charlie loses their grandmother at the
start of the film after the funeral
their mother Annie checks in on them in
a scene in which Charlie reveals that
their grandmother wanted them to be a
boy
but their mother responds as though
she's heard something else something
like I want to be a boy
declaring that they were a tomboy
growing up but in the end they got over
it we never see Charlie interact with
their grandmother so we never find out
exactly why she felt like they were
supposed to be a boy
but Charlie makes it quite apparent that
they feel
disconnected from their physical form
they have an extreme allergy to nuts
walk in a shuffle don't look at people
directly create Effigies out of garbage
and constantly click their tongue their
mother feels they need to be socialized
so their older brother Peter reluctantly
brings them to a party where they stand
out like a sore thumb
an awkward 13 year old
in a knee-length orange sweatshirt
clutching to their brother because they
don't know what else to do
Peter forces Charlie to eat chocolate
cake so he and his Crush can get high
but there's walnuts in that cake and
Charlie's throat begins to constrict and
they barge in and beg for help from
their brother who's in the middle of a
bong hit
in his haste to get them to the hospital
he swerves around a dead deer and
decapitates Charlie on a telephone pole
as they were leaning out the window for
air in a horrified Haze Peter travels
home
goes to sleep
and awakens to his mother's cries of
anguish
the camera cuts from Peter's anguished
face to an indelible shot of Charlie's
severed head swarming with ants but
Charlie's beheading was no accident it
was part of a ceremony to free them from
their body and reveal their true
identity as pymon the eighth king of
hell
they get occult's help to torment Peter
into a possessed State at which point
they take over his body
as Peter Charlie clicks his tongue to
show that he is now in control slowly he
makes his way up to his tree house where
his cult members are waiting to anoint
him King
one of the cult's leaders assures
Charlie that he is okay now
Charlie now in the body of Peter gazes
just beyond the camera mouth slightly a
gape
he does not look afraid
if anything
he seems for the first time to be at
home
the fact that Charlie's transition calls
for such Extreme Measures of physical
violence reflects a residual fear among
many CIS people the transition is a type
of Mutilation and at worst a kind of
death the sloughing off of one body in
exchange for a new different one those
who identify as trans masculine may have
their desire to transition misunderstood
as a magnetic draw away from the
submissive gender and toward the
dominant one
a power play rather than an act to feel
whole as a person if hereditary were a
typical drama it would simply follow the
family disillusion surrounding the
transition of a child the over-dramatic
concept of a person dying and a new one
being born a fantastically fictitious
morning process that so many CIS people
say they have to go through when friends
or family transition but because it's a
horror movie we get actual death murder
possession and a literal king of Hell a
queer person is never given more power
than within the scenes of a horror movie
and if hereditary says anything about
the trans experience
it's that it's a hell of a lot easier to
change your body
than to change your soul
in March of 2020
as the world failed to prepare for the
coming covid-19 pandemic
so did Hollywood the film industry's
reaction was for the most part to Simply
shut down for months movie theaters were
deserted and many customers didn't
return to theaters at all the following
year since streaming services had taken
over the void traditional Studios had
left empty in response several companies
shifted their focus to online streaming
and video on demand Services among the
earliest horror films to make the quick
transition from theaters to streaming
was freaky which originally opened in
cinemas in October of 2020 and then
became available on streaming services
two months later slasher comedy freaky
directed by Christopher Landon of happy
death day includes Josh the
protagonist's gay best friend in the
history of horror having a gay best
friend is Not Unusual the non-binary
actor Misha oshirovich who played Josh
said my character is a gay best friend
but also a commentary on the gay best
friend both they and Nyla an
African-American character who befriends
the protagonist are depicted as
independent characters who highlight the
genre's history of discrimination in one
scene Josh says to Nyla as the slasher
that once took the form of Vince Vaughn
now inhabits the body of their best
friend Millie and is on a murderous
Rampage you're black I'm gay we are so
dead filmmakers in the horror genre now
have a Keener understanding of Their
audience and make no deliberate effort
to turn away from underrepresented
groups the slasher movies Halloween
kills and the new Candyman both feature
gay male couples although in each film
only one of them survives to the end
horror fans know that Killers don't care
who they kill but what makes these two
films Stand Out is the attention paid to
the relationships between these couples
queer bodies are no longer a source of
Terror queer bodies were exploited to
shock terrify and make audiences laugh
during the bulk of the 20th century
there were punching bags sissies
Phantoms and ghosts monsters beneath the
bed and in the closet queer horror
Figures were rarely much more than
fodder for American gay Terror over the
last two decades though a new queer era
has emerged in which queer people in
horror May gain empathy from viewers
however in order to comprehend the
decade's significance previous failures
and accomplishments must be remembered
horror films are historical time
capsules whether it's aliens
representing foreigners vampires
representing sexually promiscuous
disease carriers or vicious serial
killers
each picture represents the concerns of
the day looking back at the history of
horror queer people will undoubtedly see
how we were utilized for violence
humor sympathy and Dread
however if a queer person looks deeper
it will find themselves as they have in
the pages of History
as survivors
final girls final boys and final people
in which to place themselves more
victoriously
than in the monsters that American
society has tried to turn them into and
at the same time
perhaps we can own the power of the
cisgender straight majority accidentally
gave to us via the movie Monster
the slasher returning from the grave to
take revenge on the heteronormative
stand-in of the day
the monster created by society and then
disowned by it
the Misunderstood Beast looking for its
brood
we are and always have been the heroes
of our own stories
even if we were the monsters and theirs
and so we made the monsters the hero
and now we've even taken ownership of
the Gilded Heroes themselves
we are the monsters
we are the heroes
and no matter how many times they think
they've beaten us
we always get up
one
more time
[Music]
foreign
[Applause]
[Music]
thank you